---
layout: post
title: material-2482
categories:
  -
---
# labs

## lab 2: hardness (strength) testing

- brinell test
    - to get approximate strength of material
    - load
        - 3000kg steel
        - 1500kg brass
        - 500kg aluminum 
    - 1ksi = 1000psi
    - hardness correlation (steel only)
- rockwell test
    - lighter 15-150kg
    - 14 different scale (B max 100,C max 150 are common) (quiz)
    - distance of indentation bw minor and major yield result
    - start with c scale first if we don't know the material
- the stronger the material, the less ductile
- next week quiz
    - brinell
        - adv
            - surface finish not as critical
            - better repeatability
            - wider range of hardness
        - disadv
            - measure dia (possible human error)
            - a little slower
            - not good for thin or narrow section
    - rockwell
        - adv:
            - automatic readout
            - a little quicker
            - good for thinner or narrower sections
        - disadv
            - surface finish needs to be more smoother
            - more variation between results
            - multiple scale, but smaller range

## lab 3: tensile testing

- determine how strong and ductile is
- majority of metal does not have yield point
- **quiz 2 -  strain is measure using a strain extenemeter**

## lab 4: toughness testing

- toughness is the ability of metal to absorb energy before fracturing
- 2 measure of toughness: FATT, ECTT (more common, most important)
- the test specimens is a 10mm bar, 55mm long or 10x10x50mm
- the Charpy Impact Test equipment use a 300ft.lbs or 407J pendulum 
- v-notch is the most common used
    - 45 degree v-notch
    - 2mm deep
    - 0.25mm root radius

## lab 5: heat treatment of steel

- harden heat treatment (quenching)
    - the cooling rate to create martensite is called "the critical cooling rate"
    - the critical cooling rate mainly depends on chemical composition
        - carbon, chromium, molybdenum can determine how quickly a metal has to cool to form martensite
    - anything faster than critial cooling rate is not based on phase diagram
    - quenchants (order from fastest to slowest)
        - brine (soap add to water)
        - water
        - oil
        - air
    - "never cool a metal faster than required (it can crack)"
    - quenching is rarely the final heat treatment done on a metal like steel; further heat treating is required to restore ductility and toughness

- cenmentaite: (carbon carbide) right side
- ferrite: left side of dia
- austenite : FCC
- bainite stronger than pearlite


## lab 6: strain hardening
## lab 8: Magnetic Particle Inspection & Liquid penetrant

### MPI

- testing mediums (sorted best to lowest sensitivity)
    - wet florescent
    - contrast (black on white)
    - dry powder
- **magnetic 2 directions (x and y) to catch all cracks**

|--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------|
| Advantage          | Disadvantage                                          |
|--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------|
| - portable (yoke)  | - if the part is not ferromagnetic, MPI does not work |
| - relatively cheap | - parts has to be cleaned, free of oil, grease, etc.  |
| - quick result     | - parts need to be demagnetized                       |
| - safer            | - best suited for surface flaw detection              |
| - easy             |                                                       |
|--------------------+-------------------------------------------------------|

### Liquid penetrant inspection

- steps
    - clean parts
    - apply penetrant
    - remove excess penetrant
    - apply developer 
    - inspect parts
    - clean parts

|--------------------+---------------------------------------|
| Advantages         | Disadvantages                         |
|--------------------+---------------------------------------|
| - portable         | - cracks have to be opened to surface |
| - relatively cheap | - slow (dwell time, cleaning)         |
| - easy             | - messy                               |
| - good sensitivity |                                       |
|--------------------+---------------------------------------|



## lab 10: ultrasonic testing

- can detect size and location of defects.
- velocity of sound waves is dependent on
    - type of material
        - bronze: 4700m/s
        - steel: 5960m/s
        - aluminum: 6400m/s
    - temperature
        - speed of sound @ 15C at sea level 1225 kph or 340m/s
        - speed of sound @ -25C at sea level 1140 kph or 315m/s
    - density
    - pressure
- sound is the mechanical vibration of particles in a material
- advantage:
    - superior penetrating (up to 20ft)
    - high sensitivity
    - greater accuracy (size, shape, orientation, shap_
    - safe
    - portable
- disadvantage
    - part geometry (difficult to inspect rough, irregular parts)
    - need couplants to provide an effectivee transfer of energy
- application: weldments, corrosion surveys
- methods:
    - straight beam: wall thickness, bar
    - angle beam: weld inspection

## lab 11: casting and forging

# lecture 

- what is an engineering material ?
    - anything used to build something
- metals
    - metallic lustre
    - conduct thermally
    - conduct electricity
    - ductile (stretch it, gold has very good ductivity)
    - crystallized pattern of the atoms in the solid state
    - malleable (ability withstand beaten up)
    - metallic bonding
    - classification
        - ferrous (iron based)
        - non-ferrous (non-iron based)
- non-metals
    - ceramic 
        - inorgnaic
        - very hard/brittle
    - polymers
        - organic (pvc)
    - composites (carbon fiber)
- when designing equipment what needs to be considered?
    - operating conditions
        - stresses
        - loading conditions
            - torsion
            - shear stress
        - temperatures
        - corrosive environment
        - easy fabrication
            - welding
            - machining
        - cost
        - availability of material
        - thermal expansion, weight
- solidification
    1. nucleation (initial solidification)
    2. grain or crystal growth
- in the solid form, metals have a crystalline structure on the atomic level
- these geometric patterns are called **space lattices**
- 95% of all metals will be one of 3 lattices (handout)
    - BCC: body center cubic
        - chromium
        - sodium
        - vanadium
        - tungstien
        - **iron**
    - FCC: face center cubic (more ductile, don't change with heat)
        - gold
        - silver
        - nickle
        - aluminum
        - **iron**
    - HCP: hexigonal close packed 
        - zinc
        - titanium
        - cobalt
- some metals can change their lattices shape from one to another based on temperature
    - iron: BCC (low temp) -> FCC (high temp) -> BCC (low temp)
    - this ability is called **allotropy**
        - iron is allotropic
- what is steel?
    - an alloy of iron and carbon
    - an alloy is a material with metallic properties containing 2 or more elements. At least one element has to be a metal.

## steel making 

- most common orce is Taconite
- **pig iron is brittle due to high carbon content**

      typical   Chemistry
        %C      3.5 - 4.5%
        %Mn     0.5 - 2.0%
        %Si     0.3 - 2.0%
        %S*     0.01 - 0.1%
        %P*     0.05 - 2.0%
    - (*) bad
- steel making steel 
    - **basic oxygen furnace is the most commonly used 60% world ouput**

## phase diagrams

- phase 
    - uniform chemical composition (usually)
    - surround by boundaries and can be identified under a microscope
    - used to show the different phases that can occur with alloys systems
    - based on chemical composition and temperature

- AISI : American Iron and Steel Institute
    - C1010
        - first 2 digits alloy family; 10 : plain carbon steel
        - last 2 digits is the percent of carbon
- ferrite : BCC, UTS ~ 30ksi or under 250mpa
- pearlite : contains 2 phases (exact 0.8 % of C) much stronger than ferrite (UTS~100ksi)
    - white ferrite
    - cementile
- %c go up, strength go up
- %c go up, ductivity go down
- the iron/carbon phase diagram is based on slow equilibrium cooling
- if the cooling rate becomes too quick, then carbon doesn't have a chance to diffuse. The lattice gets distorted into a body centered terragonal shape called Martensite (BCT)
- Martensite is a hard (HRC 55 and up) and very brittle structure.
- further heat treating is usually required 

## the role of carbon and alloy content of steels

- when alloying elements are added to a base metal, one of three things can happen (or combination of the three)

### solid solution

- SSS: gold alloy with silver
- ISS: carbon added to iron is interstitial
- interstice is a "open space" in lattice

### elements can seperate into their own phases

### intermetallic compounds can form 

- hard brittle
- e.g. Fe_3C - iron cardide (cementite)
- tungsten carbide

## organizations and societies

## steel designations

- there are many different designations and technical societies
- e.g. ASTM
    - A: ferrous metals
    - B: non ferrous
    - C: calibration and testing
- AISI: American Iron and Steel Institute
    - 4-5 digits
    - first 2 alloy group
    - last 2/3 %C/100
    - 10xx plain carbon steel
    - 41xx chromium/molybdenum
    - 86xx low chrome/nickel/moly
- API: American Petroleum Institute
    - API uses ASTM/AISI grades and they use their own designations
        - e.g. API 5CT (casing/tubing)
grade J-55 min 0.2%ys  max 0.2ys   min uts
           55ksi       80 ksi      75ksi
           (380mpa)    (550mpa)    (520mpa)
grade N-80 80ksi       110ksi      100ksi
           (550mpa)    (760mpa)    (690mpa)

## cast iron

- on the iron carbon phase dia CI's have bw 2-6.5% carbon
- most commercial CI's have between 2-4% carbon and 1-3% silicon
- ci's cannot be formed by forging or rolling; they have to be shaped by molding
- weldability tends to be poor
- 4 types (groups): white, malleable, gray, nodular (ductile ci)

## stainless steel

- developed for their corrosion resistance
- in order for a steel to become stainless chromium  is required
- a minimum of 11% Cr is needed to form a protective chromium oxide layer ($$Cr_2O_3$$) 11-30% 
- this layer self heals. If the oxide layer is damaged or removed it will reform as long as oxygen is present
- 5 main groups of stainless steels (based on the metallurgy and heat treatment)

### ferritic (AISI 400 series)

- 12-27% Cr
- low carbon (usually 0.12% max)
- can not strengthen by heat treating
- magnetic
- poor weldability
- corrosion resistance bw martensitic and austenitic
- applications:
    - cook ware
    - exhaust systems
    - high temp application

### martensitic (AISI 400 series)

- 12-17% Cr 
- % carbon up to 1.2%
    - there are low carbon types as well. 
- design for higher strength and hardness
- strengthened by heat treating
- magnetic
- some grades are weldable
- applications:
    - high quality blade steel e.g. 440C
    - low carbon grades are used for values, chokes, flange (e.g 410)
    - high strength fasteners


### austenitic (AISI 200 and 300 series)

- most widely used type of stainless* (about 50%)
- 16-25% Cr and 7-20%Ni (FCC) (300 series), 'rarely use marganesee (200 series)'
- Ni is an austenite stabilizer, so these types are FCC (very good toughness)
- non-magnetic
- cannot strengthened by heat treating
- easiest type of stainless to weld (account for about 90% of all stainless welding)
- very good low temperature toughness (due to nickel content)
- good or high temp application
- applications:
    - chemical and food processing
    - fuel lines
    - valves, chokes, piping
    - refrigerator cars

### duplex (trade name e.g. ferralium 255))

- two phased microstructure (ferrite and austenite)
- 20-25% Cr
- 4-7% Ni
- 2-4 Mo
- better strength and corrosion resistance to chlorides than austenitic stainless.
- good toughness and weldability
- applications:
    - heat exchanger tubing
    - offshore drilling equipment
    - desalination plants

### precipitation hardened (sometimes named after %Cr/%Ni content) (ASTM 600 series)

- are hardened and strengthened to the highest levels of all stainless steels
- usually named after the Cr/Ni content e.g. 17-4 (17%Ni, 4%Cr) (martensitic microstructure)
- magnetic / weldable
- good toughness
- applications:
    - aerospace components
    - petroleum equipment e.g. valve stems
    - high strength fasteners

## review midterm

- List the three components of a charge loaded into a blast furnace to make pig iron and briefly explain what each component is for? 
    - iron ore: the source of element iron after chemical reduction in the blast furnace.
    - lime stone: an fluxing agent that remove impurities and forms a slag over the molten
    metallic iron. Slag not only contains most of the impurities but also acts as an oxidation
    shield.
    - coke (solid product of destructive distillation of coal.) Reducing agent (carbon monoxide) to remove oxygen from the ore.
$$
\\
O_2 + 2C (coke) -> 2CO\\
Fe_2O_3 +3CO -> 2Fe + 3 CO_2
$$

- What are the 2 stages in the transition of a liquid to a solid state? 
    - nucleation
    - gain or crystal growth
- What is the most common type of furnace used in steel making? 
    - basic oxygen furnace
- What is the name of the device that measures strain on the UTM?
    - strain extensometer
- What does the term fully killed steel mean? 
    - completely remove oxygen
- Name the two phases in Pearlite. What is the carbon content of Pearlite?
    - white ferrite & cementile
- What is the crystalline structure of Martensite? 
    - body center tetragonal (BCT)
- What 2 elements are known for deoxidizing the melt during steel making?  
    - manganese, silicon, or aluminum
- Describe a Substitution Solid Solution.
    - formed when atoms of a solute metal substitute for atoms of a solvent metal
- Carbon in steel is substitutional? True or False
    - carbon in steel is substitutional 
- What is the crystalline form for austenite and what is the maximum solubility of Carbon? 
     - FCC; max 2% C
- What marks are common with fatigue failures?
    - beach marks are centered around a common point, fatigue crack origin
- What is Allotropy?
    - metal's ability to change lattices shape from one to another based temperature
- What are the A3 and A1 lines called on the iron carbon phase diagram?
    - A1: lower critical temperature (LCT)
    - A3: upper critical temperature (UCT)
- What is the difference between Yield Point and 0.2% offset Yield Strength. 
    - yield point is the stress at witch the material exhibits an increase in strain without a corresponding increase in stress.
    - 0.2% offset yield strength is the stress at which the material exhibits 0.002mm/mm of permanent (plastic) deformation.
- A material shows with a diameter of 15.9 mm shows a strain of 0.0004 mm/mm at 105 Kilo-newton's. What is the modulus of elasticity? 
$$
\\
Area = 15.9 * 15.9 * 0.7954 = 198.56mm^2\\
Stress = Load / Area = 105000N / 198.56mm^2 = 528.81Mpa\\
MoE = Stress / Strain = 528.81Mpa / 0.0004 mm/mm = 1322Gpa
$$
- Modulus of Elasticity is a measure of what property?
    - measures the stiffness and the ability to bend of material
- The charpy impact machine generates how much foot-lbs of energy?
    - 300 ft.lbs or 407J
- What are the dimensions of a standard chary impact test sample? 
    - 10mm x 10mm x 55mm
    - 45 V-notch, 2mm deep, 0.25mm root radius 
- What types of indenters are used for Brinell, Rockwell B and C scales? What are the loads?
    - Brinell's indenter: 10mm diameter tungsten carbide ball
        - loads: 500kg, 1500kg, 3000kg
    - Rockwell's B scale indenter: 1/16" diameter tungsten carbide ball
        - loads: 10kg/100kg
    - Rockwell's C scale indenter: 120 cone-shaped diamond (Brale diamond)
        - loads: 10kg/150kg
- Describe fatigue. What is the endurance limit and fatigue strength?
    - fatigue are failures associated with fluctuating or cyclic stress 
    - fatigue strength is the cyclic stress level that a material fails at; the higher stress level, the fewer number of cycles that will be required to cause the material to fail.
    - endurance limit is a limiting stress below which a load may be applied an infinite number of times without causing failure
- What are the 3 stages of creep?
    - Primary: creep occurring at a decreasing rate (cold working)
    - Secondary: exhibit minimum creep rate, constant rate
    - Tertiary: exhibit creep at an accelerating rate, followed by fracture.
- What is ECTT and FATT?
    - Fracture Appearance Transition Temperature (FATT) is the temperature when the fracture surface is 50% ductile and 50% brittle
    - Energy Criteria Transition Temperature (ECTT) is the temperature where the fracture requires some specific amount energy (20 joules or 15 ft-lbs)
- What is the microstructure of hypoeutectic steels?
    - 0.008 to 0.8% C
    - contain pearlite and ferrite
- A bar 10mm X 8mm is subjected to a force of 15,000 Newton's. What is the stress on the bar? 
$$
stress = load /area = 15000N / (10*8) = 187.5Mpa
$$
- What is the approximate carbon content of an AISI 1010 steel?
    - 0.10% (last 2 digit)
- What are the four groups of cast irons? Which type has flaked shape graphite? Which type has no freed-up graphite? 
    - white cast iron  (carbides)
    - malleable cast iron (freed up graphite)
    - gray cast iron (flaked shape graphite) (most common)
    - nodular cast iron (rounded graphite)
- Which type of cast iron is used for pump housings or sewer covers?
    - gray cast iron
- What is the minimum carbon content of cast irons on the iron carbon phase diagram?
    - minimum 2%
- Which association is responsible for the prevention of corrosion?
    - NACE (National Organization of Corrosion Engineers
- Which association is responsible for the design of pressure vessels?
    - ASME (American Society of Mechanical Engineers)
- What is a common type of steel used for pressure vessels?
    - fully killed astm A516 Cr70
- Which group of stainless steel is used for high quality blade steels?
    - martensitic AISI 400 series e.g 440C
- Which group of stainless steels are non-magnetic
    - austenitic
- Which group of stainless steels are considered the easiest to weld? 
    - austenitic
- How does chromium make stainless steel stainless?
    - a minimum of 11% Cr is needed to form a protective chromium oxide layer ($$Cr_2O_3$$) 11-30% 
    - this layer self heals. If the oxide layer $$Cr_2O_3$$ is self heals or removed it will reform as long as oxygen is present
- What is the minimum amount of chromium needed to make stainless steel stainless?
    - minimum 11% Cr
- What were the 3 stages of heat treatment for the cold working lab?
    - recovery, recrystalization, grain growth
- Does the hardness continue to go up from cold working?
    - No, there is a limit
- Directional properties resulting from cold working is called?
    - anisotropy
- What happens to the ductility of a cold worked metal?
    - ductivity decreases when the material is cold worked
- What is sensitization?

# Flanar flaws - disavantage of radiaction

- it would pickup thin crack that is horizontal with the source

# non-ferrous metals

- non-iron based
- there are non-ferrous alloys that do contain small amounts of iron.
- the metal covered
    - aluminum
    - copper
    - tin/lead alloys
    - nickel
    - cobalt
    - zinc
    - cemented carbides

## aluminum

- next to iron based alloys, Al is the second most widely used metal on the planet
- comes from the ore bauxite $$Al(OH))_3$$
- like iron it is very easily alloyed 
- very versitile/economical 
- density 2.7 g/cm3 (1/3 the density of iron)
- FCC lattice
- non-magnetic
- corrosion resistance come from a $$Al_2O_3$$ oxide layer
- some grades can be strengthened by heat treating, others have to be cold worked
- some grades are weldable
- Al has about 60% the electrical conductivity of copper
- high thermal conductivity
- some grades have a high weight to strength ratio e.g 7075 - uts 80ksi or 540mpa
    - designation AA/ANSI, 4 digit system
        - .xxxx wrought (forging)
        - .xxx.x casting

## copper and copper alloys

- ranks 3rd behind steel and al production
- most Cu is found in sulphides but small amounts can be found in its native state
- known for excellent thermal and electrical conductivity (second behind silver)
- denser than iron (8.9g/cm3)
- FCC structure
- very good ductility; cold work easily
- due to high thermal conductivity it can be difficult to weld; high preheats required
- soldering (<450C) and brazing (>450C - used bronze) is used to join copper (don't melt the material, not strong as welding)
- above 80% is used in its commercially pure form, the remainder is used for alloying
- the two common alloys brass (yellow) and bronze (reddish, for long time found 5000years ago)

### brass

- *alloy of copper and zinc (Zn)*
- depend on alloy content there can be a wide range of properties
    - easy to work
    - easy to machine
    - good corrosion resistance
- cold work brass + ammonia = bad (season cracking can occur)

### bronze

- *traditionally an alloy of Cu and Sn (Tin)*
- other metals / elements will also make bronze
    - nickel
    - chromium
    - silicon
    - phosphorus
    - aluminum
- tin bronze has good strength and good fatigue strength
- low coefficient of friction (good for bearing surfaces)

## tinc and lead

- tin + lead = babbitt
- babbitt is a bearing material

## nickle

- Ni is a very important engineering material for modern industry.
- Ni uses (2011)
    - stainless steel 65%
    - other alloys (superalloys) - 22%
    - electroplating - 8%
    - other - 5%
- pure Ni = uts 65 ksi or 450mpa
- density 8.9g/cm3 iron 7.8g/cm3
- fcc
- magnetic up to 360C
- can dramatically improve toughness for low temp applications

## cobalt

- is between Fe and Ni on the periodic table
- 8.8g/cm3
- allotropic: HCP-FCC-HCP
- magnetic
- largest use is for superalloys

## super alloys

- developed for high temperatures up to 1100C or 2000F
- many uses
    - aerospace
    - petrochemical
    - offshore marine apps
- 3 groups of superalloys

### nickel based

- most common of the 3 groups
- known for good corrosion resistance
- some have excellent low temp impact strength e.g. 718 inconel

### cobalt based

- have the best creep resistance
- some have excellent wear resistance e.g. stellite #6

## iron based

- high end austenitic stainless steel with better strength and corrosion resistance.

## zinc

- soft material with a low melting temp (420C)
- HCP
- good atmospheric corrosion resistance 
- most common use:
    - sacrificial anode (galvanized steel)

## cemented carbides

- considered a ceramic
- part of a group of materials that are hard with good wear resistance
- e.g. tungsten carbide
    - parts are made in molds at high temperatures and pressures
    - the tc particles are held together by a metal binded (cobalt or nickel)

# thermal expansion

- material subjected to changing temperatures can undergo changes in dimensions.
- the amount of dimensional change is dependent on
    - type of material
    - changing temperatures.
- formula: $$\Delta L=\alpha L \Delta T$$
    - \alpha = coefficient of thermal expansion
    - \deltaL = change in length
    - L = original length
    - \deltaT = temp change
- \alpha unit: (mm/mm C) or (in/in F)
- steel: 11.7x10^-6
- aluminum: 23 x 10^-6
- Cu: 17.2x10^-6
- if expansion is restricted or not permitted then stresses will build up.
    - formula: $$\sigma = \alpha E \delta T$$
        - \sigma : stress in mpa or psi
        - \alpha: coefficient of T.E.
        - E: modulus of elasticity
        - \delta T: change in temp
- sample question
    1. what is the change in length in a steel bridge 300m long temp change -30 to 30 C
        - \delta L = \alpha L \delta T = 11.7x10^6 (mm/mm C) x 300 m x 60 = 0.211m
    2. if the bridge is not allowed to expand what stress will be build up
        - $$\sigma = \alpha E \delta T = 11.7*10^{-6} * 207Gpa * 60C = 0.145GPa (21000psi)$$
    3. imperial units
        - E_{steel} = 30,000,000psi
        - \alpha = 6.6*10^{-6}
        - A bar 1/2"x1/2"x24" long changes in temp from 60F to 120F
            - what is the \deltaL
                - \DeltaL = \alphaL\DeltaT = 6.6*10^-6*24"*60F = 0.01"
            - not allowed to expand
                \sigma = \alphaE\DeltaT = 6.6*10^-6 * 30,000,000psi * 60 = 11.9ksi
            - we can calculate the force acting on the bar
                \sigma = F/ A => F = \sigma * A = 11.9ksi * 1/2"*1/2" = 2970lb

# shear stress

- shear stresses act parallel to the stress surface
- \sigma_s: occurs in bolts, shear pins, lap welds
- simplest type of \sigma_s happens in bolts
    - \sigma_s = force causing shear / area resisting shear = F/A 
    - single shear: 2-lap welds
    - double shear: 3-lap welds
- sample questions
    - 10mm dia bolt fastens 2 plates together. if the allowable shear stress $$\sigma = 150mpa$$ what load can be applied
        - $$F = \sigma_s*A = 150mpa * \pi * 10^2 / 4 = 11.8kN = 2650lbf$$
    - a clevis pin is subjected to 50,000lbf the dia of the pin is 2". what is the \sigma_s
        - \sigma_s = F / A = 50,000lbf / (2 * (\pi*2^2)/4) = 7.96ksi

# torsion

- caused by twisting or rotating
- imperial
    - $$HP = TN / 63,000$$
        - T: torque in lb
        - N: RPM
        - HP: horse power
- metric
    - $$KW = TN/9540$$
        - T: N.m
        - 1 HP = 746 watts
- $$ \sigma_s = Tr/J$$
    - $$J = {\pi * {(D_o^4 - D_i^4)}\over 32 }$$
        - $$D_o$$ outside diameter
        - $$D_i$$ inside diameter
        - r: distance to center of shaft
- angle of twist $$\theta$$ of shaft
    - $$\theta = TL/GJ$$
        - $$\theta$$ radians
        - $$1 radian = 180/\pi = 57.3$$
        - $$1 degree = 0.0175$$
        - L = length
        - G = modulus of shear
        - G_steel = 83 Gpa (imperial)
- ex: sample torque questions
    - determine the max $$\sigma_s$$ in a shaft transmitting 300kw @ 300 rpm
        - **solid** 100mm dia (don't use inside dia in solving)
            - KW = TN/9540 => T = 300kw*9540/300rpm = 9540N.m
            - $$\sigma_s = Tr / J = (9540N.m * 0.05m) / \pi * 0.1m^4 / 32 = 48.6mpa$$ 
        - hollow shaft $$D_o=100mm$$, $$D_i = 50mm$$
            - $$\sigma_s = Tr / J = (9540N.m * 0.05m) / \pi * (0.1m^4 - 0.05m^4) / 32 = 51.8mpa$$ 
    - design a solid shaft to transmit 50kw @ 1130rpm; the allowable shear stress = 70mPa
        - find T
            - $$T = KW * 9540 / N = 50 * 9540 / 1130rpm = 422.12 N.m$$
        - find diameter
            - $$\sigma_s = Tr / J$$
            - $$\sigma_s = Tr * 32 \over {\pi * D^4} = T * 0.5 * D * 32 / \pi*D^4 = T * 16 / \pi*D^3$$
            - $$ D^3 = T*16/\pi*\sigma_s = 422N.m * 16 / \pi * 70000000N/m^2 = 0.0000307$$
            - $$D = 31mm$$
